The year is 30XX. Civilization has ceased to exist after global nuclear war devastated the planet. Life on the planet has been reduced to a fraction of what it used to be. But from out of the ruins of our once great cities and from out of the endless expanse of radioactive deserts emerge a new breed of humans: the wastelanders!
Unfortunately, these wastelanders quickly learned there just isn't enough room in this post-apocalyptic word for everyone to coexist peacefully. 

Game Setup

Each player starts with 10 heath tokens, and should have rad tokens nearby. Additionally, each player should receive the following cards:

	* 5x 9mm cards
	* 2x AntiRads
	* 3x Gecko on a stick
	
This will form the players' starting stockpiles. Remove any remaining copies of these cards from the game. 

Shuffle the remaing decks:

	* Locations
	* Common Encounters
	* Rare Encounters
	* Catastrophes
	* Common salvage
	* Rare salvage - Weapon
	* Rare salvage - Medical
	* Allies
	* Mutations

Finally, each player rolls a D6. High roll gains the first player token.

Order of Play
The following section describes the basic round of play in Beyond Megaton.

	1. Setup Locations:
		1. Reveal 1 Location card per player and place them face up in the middle of the play area.
		2. Randomly draw the necessary rewards for each location as detailed on the location card, and place them face down adjacent their respective locations.
		3. Build the encounter decks for each location. Start by randomly placing 1 common encounter on each location.
		4. Each alive player draws 4 common encounters and 1 rare encounter. Dead players draw 3 encounters common and 2 rare encounters.
		5. Starting from the first player, players take turns placing any number of encounter cards face down on a location. Note that dead players still participate in this phase of the game.
		6. After all encounters have been placed, shuffle each pile of encounter cards place them on top of their respective locations.

	2. Prep Phase:
		1. Players secretly select 10 cards from their stockpiles and 1 ally card (if they have any). 
		2. Starting from the current first player, each player places their ally card face up in front of them.

	3. Exploration Phase: 
		1. Exploration starts with the player holding the first player token. If the first player token is currently assigned to a dead player, play immediately skips to the next player in clockwise order.
		2. The current player may either immediately drop out, or initiate an exploration. If they drop out they may no longer participate in the current exploration phase.
		3. If the player chooses to explore, they must pick a location and declare how many encounters they wish to resolve, between 1 and 3.
		4. Draw and resolve the number of encounters declared, one at a time. If at any point during this step a player is reduced to 0 health, they are dead.
		5. If all encounters on a location are resolved, the player may claim the rewards from that location.
		6. If at any point during resolving of encounters a player drops to 0 health, they die. Play immediately moves to the next player in order.
		7. The exploration phase repeats until all players have dropped out or all locations have been fully explored.

	4. Catastrophe Phase:
		1. Shuffle the catastrophe deck and draw 1 plus the number of dead players catastrophe cards. Dead players vote on which catastrophe will be resolved. In cases of ties, randomly select the catastrophe. Return all unused catastrohpe cards to the catastrophe deck.
		2. Reveal the selected catastrophe.
		3. Players must secretly place any number of their remaining in hand salvage cards face down in front of them.
		4. All players reveal their face down cards and resolve the card.
		5. If the pass condition is met, carry out the effect described by the "Pass" section of the card.
		6. If the pass condition is not met, carry out the effect described by the "Fail" section of the card.
		7. Place the resolved card in the catastrophe discard pile.

	5. Mutation Phase:
		1. If any players current rad level exceeds their health, they undergo a horrible mutation. Draw a mutation card from the mutation deck.
		2. For every 2 rads above their health, draw an mutation additonal card.
		3. If at any time a player has two of the same mutation, they die of radiation poisoning.

	6. Cleanup
		1. Return all remaining salvage cards to the players stockpiles.
		2. Pass the first player token to the next player in clockwise order.
		3. Start a new round of play.

=========================
Additional Clarifications
=========================

Resolving Encounters
After drawing and revealing an encounter to all players, the active player may use any number of salvage cards, one at a time, to resolve the encounter. As soon as the desired requirement is met, the encounter as been resolved. Most used salvage cards are placed face up in front of the player in the player's discard pile. These cards will be reclaimed at the end of a round of play, unlike cards which are trashed and placed in the wasteland (see "Trashing Cards"). After resolving an encounter, place it in the encounter discard pile.
If an encounter lists a Toughness number it indicates how much damage is required.
Players must always attempt to complete one of the objectives on an encounter. If a player is unable to resolve any of the conditions on the encounter, the encounter card must be returned face up to the location it was drawn from. This encounter must still be resolved by the next player to explore the location.
Cards with a prevent effect must be played at the time of incurring the damage or rad gain. Cards with a gain or remove effect may be played during any encounter. 
	* For example, a player decides to resolve the "Rad Scorpion" event by losing 1 health and gaining 1 rad. At this time the player can play the "AntiRads" salvage card to prevent 1 rad gain. In a subsequent encounter the same player chooses to play "Gecko on a stick", gaining 1 health and 1 rad. At this time, if the player had another "AntiRads" card they would be able to play it again.

Trashing Cards and the Wasteland
All players trashed salvage cards are placed face up in the wasteland. The wasteland is shared by all players, and players are allowed to look at the contents of the wasteland at any time.

Catastrophes
Catastrophes are major events resolved at the end of each round of exploration. They effect all players. To resolve a catastrophe, players must secretly place any number of salvage cards face up in front of themselves. After all players have selected, everyone reveals the selected cards and resolve the effects described on the card.
Dead players participate in the catastrophe phase too. Draw 1 plus the number of dead players catastrophe cards. Dead players vote on which catastrophe will be resolved. In cases of ties, randomly select the catastrophe.

Mutations
After drawing a mutation card, players must place the card face up in front of them. Starting with the next round after the card is drawn, the mutation card is in effect for that player. If a player draws a duplicate of any mutation, they are immediately killed.

Player Death
Players are dead when they reach 0 health or have 2 copies of the same mutation.
When a player dies all their salvage must be immediately discarded to the wasteland. The player still participates in the Setup Locations phase, but they are no longer a contender for winning the game.

Winning the Game
The game is won when there is a single wastelander left standing! You've braved the wastes and emerged trimuphant.